---
layout: post
title: "Insights 02020" 
category: insights
abstract: Collage of powerful insights and notes
---

---

[Product Roadmap Prioritization](https://medium.com/unusual-ventures/jyoti-bansals-secret-to-managing-a-startup-s-product-roadmap-the-four-lists-d904963f4c2) via [Jyoti Bansal](https://twitter.com/jyotibansalsf)
A systematic & practical framework to think about product roadmap prioritization.

---

The joy of actually debugging something starting from a complete unknown state & then fixing a problem is boundless. Not to mention the obvious, but applying this strategy to your life at a meta-level has infinite upside. Caveat: problem has to be uniquely interesting to you.

---

It’s fascinating Index Funds, introduced in 1970s, took so long to be a popular investment choice. Fast forward to now, 2020, it’s the dominant investment medium. Guess, counter-positioning with a valid logical/economically sound thesis — is a real strategic advantage.

---

**4 Kinds of Chance/Luck by Dr. James Austin via [Marc Andressen](https://twitter.com/pmarca):**     	
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.Complete pure impersonal luck. Accidental, you can't influence.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.Favors those who have a persistent curiosity about many things coupled with an energetic willingness to experiment & explore.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3.Favors those who have sufficient background of sound knowledge plus special abilities in observing, remembering, recalling, and quickly forming significant new associations.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4. Favors those with distinctive, if not eccentric hobbies, personal lifestyles, and motor behaviors. 

---

**Product-Market-Fit Measurement Formual via [Andy Rachleff](https://twitter.com/arachleff):**  
*Enterprise:*  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.Sales Yield > 1 [HBR Article](https://hbr.org/2006/07/the-sales-learning-curve)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.Pull the product after 30 days of trial or PoC. Customer needs to yell that they need it.  
*Consumer:*  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1.Organic word of mouth (WoM) growth (not purchased or gamed growth but exponential organic growth)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2.NPS (Net Promoter Score) - A Decent (not the best) Proxy for WoM  

---

When travellng to a non-English speaking country make sure to spend enough time learning their language. It will make your experience 10x better. I made the mistake of going to Chile w/o putting any effort in learning Spanish, I totally regretted that decision. Obviously it isn't hard to get around using Google Translate but you don't get to make a real connection or conversation with the locals. In retrospect, it seems very abrasive & disrespectful to not make a genuine effort in trying to understand their language. Nonetheless, definitely download offline language models on your Google Translate app.