---
layout: post
title: "7 Powers - Business Strategy by Hamilton Helmer"
category: marginalia
date: 2019-09-01
abstract: A thinking framework for evaluating and evolving business strategy
---

If you need to critically think about your business strategy; [7 Powers](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0998116319/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_U_qMxBDbNWQ29KQ) provides you with a framework/mental model to do so. It is also handy as an investor for evaluating the value and competitive advantage of a particular business, current and looking ahead in the future. By no means, is it a comprehensive guide on how to develop a sound business strategy or excellent go-to-market machinery. Although it helps you review what you currently have under a concrete evaluation framework and enables you to think about where and how you want to go to the next level.

To attain a real Power (a.k. a. competitive edge), he explains why invention -- either of process, product, brand, or business model always needs to come first. Pretty much, this is the core thesis of your business. He then provides a progression ladder to enable you to target how and when you establish Power - whether it is in the origination, take-off, or stability stage of your business. It does depend on the kind of business. I found it refreshing because the valley is so full of talk around execution and culture that people don't talk about Strategy that much. Not to mention, it's a tough subject to discuss. _Note:_ This is in the last two chapters.

A great pairing with 7 Powers would be Peter Theil's [Zero To One]( https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00J6YBOFQ/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_U_o2xBDb30V4AVS). I say this because it will completely drill in one core message from both the books. The message being:  _your business must achieve Power (a.ka. a sort of skewed durable competitive edge) to be a successful long-term business._ Theil talks about in terms of business monopoly and uniqueness while Hamilton discusses it in terms of seven attributes (a.k.a Powers) that such a monopoly business would have.

Hamilton talks about each of these seven attributes with examples. Examples help walkthrough why those companies possess one or more of these attributes in a skewed competitive advantage sense. The core attributes are:
- Economies of Scale: Netflix (per unit cost reduces significantly with scale) 
- Network Economy: LinkedIn, Facebook (bigger network; bigger  accumulating advantages) 
- Counter Positioning: Vanguard (sound contrarian thesis against status-quo) 
- Switching Costs: SAP (the cost to change to something else is too much headache)
- Branding: Tiffany (emotional attachment, brand > product) 
- Cornered  Resource: Pixar (scare resource - talent, IP, invention, etc. and all they all belong to you) 
- Process Power: Toyota (durable, incremental, high-quality processes improvements leading to massive accumulating advantages) 

##### Margin Notes:

Your core invention/compelling value (business model, product, or process) + market dynamics/trends + market size + execution quality => these four factors ultimately decide the fate of your business and its lifetime.

Although operational excellence at your business is hard, all-consuming, and necessary; it isn't a sufficient condition for success. A strong Strategy needs to be at the heart of the business.

The creation of Strategy is _not_ a one-time static process. It needs to change/adapt quickly; especially in the early stages of the company.

The seven powers provide a good thinking & evaluation mental model for investment. You can measure through some concrete dimensions under his framework.

As a business, you need to strive to have more than one of the seven powers as a golden rule, but without possessing either of those, you can't sustain long term growth as a business. You will die.

Market size is a dominant term in his formula. The ultimate shareholder value you can provide is strongly correlated to the market size, to begin with. Try to attack hard problems in a big market.